+++
title = "Tops and precession"
[extra]
latex = true
+++

Remember playing with tops when you were younger? It turns out that they're
interesting not only to children but also to physicists. Take precession.
If you spin a top, as it slows down, it starts to wobble. In the simplest
case, the handle of the top just spins around tracing out a rough cone.
It's called precession, and it affects all sorts of things, from electrons
to the Earth.
Here's how it works. You have a top, which is spinning and thus has some
angular momentum. If the top is adequately symmetrical, then the angular
momentum just points along the spin axis, either upwards or downwards,
depending on the direction you spun it. The direction is determined by the
right-hand rule, so if the top is spinning clockwise if you look at it from
above, the angular momentum vector points down. Similarly, counterclockwise
means the angular momentum points up. For now, let's suppose that the
angular momentum is pointing upwards. If the top is completely vertical,
then the top spins merrily onwards, and nothing interesting happens.
Luckily, in the real world, nothing is ever so exact as to be totally
vertical. Random perturbations happen, and the top tilts slightly. In any
case, once this happens, gravity tries to pull the top downward further,
which (treating the top's point of contact with the table as our pivot)
creates a torque according to the cross product $\vec\tau=\vec r\times\vec
F$ ($\vec\tau$ is torque, $\vec r$ is the radius vector from the point of
rotation to the point on which the force acts - in this case, the center of
mass of the top, and $\vec F$ is the force, in this case from gravity). If
the top is tilted to the right, then the torque vector points away from us.
If the top wasn't spinning, it would just topple over under the influence
of gravity. But because it's spinning, and because angular momentum is
conserved, it can't just topple like that. So what happens?
Recall that $\vec\tau=\frac{d\vec L}{dt}$, that is, torque causes a change
in the angular momentum. And it's a vector relationship - since the torque
is pointing away from us, after a very short time $dt$, the angular
momentum is pointed slightly more away from us than originally. But observe
that the torque is always perpendicular to the angular momentum. So while
the angular momentum changes direction, it does not change length. Thus the
top continues spinning happily, but its axis of rotation precesses around a
cone. Neat!

So why is this precession only apparent when the top slows down? The length
of the angular momentum vector is proportional to the speed of rotation.
When the top is spinning really fast, the angular momentum vector is so
long that it dwarfs the contribution of the torque from gravity, so the
wiggles are tiny. As the top spins on and on, it's rubbing against the
floor or table, and friction slows down its rotation. As that happens, the
torque is less tiny compared to the angular momentum, so the wiggles become
more and more noticeable, and eventually, the top spins out of control and
falls over.
