+++
title = "Scattering particles"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["physics", "particle physics"]
[extra]
latex = true
+++
It turns out that the $\Delta^{++}$ particle (capital delta with a double '+'
superscript, pronounced "Delta plus plus"), which is typically discussed as
a composition of three up quarks, is actually just a resonance in
scattering experiments. That is, we know it exists because if we're
shooting pions at protons, for certain energy pions, we see way more
scattering than for nearby energies. This is explained as the pion and the
proton combining to create a new particle, the $\Delta^{++}$, which almost
instantaneously decays into a proton and a pion. The new proton and pion
can head off in basically whatever direction they want, so scattering cross
section is very high. But the decay happens so fast that it's impossible to
directly observe the $\Delta^{++}$ particle; it really is just a resonance!
This same resonance is observed in a variety of experiments involving
different scatterers, and based on the width of the scattering peak, we can
find out the mass and lifetime of the particle.

On a related note, the $\Delta^{++}$ is a member of the delta family, which
consists of four baryons (particles composed of three quarks) involving
only up and down quarks, the same basic ingredients as protons and
neutrons. That includes the $\Delta^{+}$ (uud) and the $\Delta^0$ (udd)
baryons, which have the same quark composition as protons and neutrons,
respectively. The distinction is that in the delta family, the spins of all
three constituent quarks are aligned, for a net spin of 3/2, rather than
1/2 for the proton and neutron. This spin alignment is a higher-energy
state than the 'ground-state' nucleons, which is manifested in the delta
family's higher masses and shorter lifetimes.
