+++
title = "Wilderness First Response"
[taxonomies]
tags = ["EMS"]
+++

<img src="/img/201711-wfr.png" class="center" style="width:300px"/>

In early October, I made my way to Salt Lake City to visit my wonderful
grandparents and take a course in wilderness medicine. The Wilderness First
Responder (WFR, pronounced “woofer,” like a woofing dog) certification is a
virtual necessity for many guiding jobs in the outdoor industry, and also
demonstrates a certain level of seriousness towards other outdoor activities.
It’s a ten-day, 80-hour course on (approximately speaking) most of the things
that can kill you in the wilderness and what to do about them.

Not only is this useful for working in the outdoor industry, it was also just a
blast. I had 26 classmates, including guides, mountaineers, firefighters, EMT
students, teachers, and everything in between. And with around 80 hours of
class time and lots more hanging out and studying together, we got to know each
other pretty well! It was an amazing class on the whole. I can tell you all
about things that can kill you in the wilderness now, and while diagnosing
isn’t in my scope of practice, I can at this point do a thorough patient
assessment, determine when someone needs to be evacuated, say how fast they
need to get out, and help with those efforts. The course is structured with
about 50% classroom time and 50% scenarios, which include assessing patients
(classmates), giving reports on patient condition, and managing patient care
for varying lengths of time.

A few personal favorites:

* One day shortly before lunch, one of our instructors, Liz, mentioned almost
in passing “hey y’all, just so you know it looks like it’ll rain this
afternoon. NOAA sometimes gets it wrong in the mountains.” Naturally, several
people pulled out pocket internet devices and explained that no, it was
supposed to be sunny and clear all afternoon. Liz reiterated “no, I really
think it’s going to rain. Sometimes you should just trust your instructors on
this one.” Sure enough, our first scenario after lunch involved hypothermic
patients and extremly strong, almost horizontal rain…in the form of a hose
directed at us by none other than Liz herself. It was an eye-opening and
clothes-drenching scenario, but thoroughly empowering; we know now that we can
do patient assessments and treatment in all sorts of weather.
* We had a lovely Splint-O-Rama, a friendly splinting competition. We got to do
not only the “common” splints (forearm plus sling and swath, tib/fib splinting,
etc), but also a few really bizarre ones, like a posterior shoulder
dislocation. And all of that with only the gear we would normally take on a day
hike! Improvisation is the name of the game in most wilderness settings. Here’s
me posing as a splint/sling/swath model - by the end of the class we could
improvise a sling out of pants, long-sleeved shirt, jacket, or triangle
bandages.
<img src="/img/20171008-splinting.jpg" class="center" style="width:200px"/>
* Our big night scenario on day eight: I’d been looking forward we this since
day one, and it very much lived up to expectations. While I can’t say much
about the scenario itself (the first rule of night scenario…), I think I can
safely say it forced us to communicate effectively, use resources wisely and
above all prioritize patient care.

Our final day was dedicated to a celebration of knowledge, also known as
practical and written exams, and I’m very proud to say that I am now
WFR-certified!

Thank you so much to our two wonderful NOLS instructors Liz Schmohl and Patrick
Wright and my fabulous classmates for an unforgettable (and educational!)
experience. I had such a great time that I’m now contemplating doing an EMT
course at some point, but in the more immediate future I’m hoping to get some
experience with NY state search and rescue.

<img src="/img/20171015-WFR.jpg" class="center rounded" style="width:100%"/>
