+++
title = "Training story: Lightning drill on ice"
date = 2018-05-22
[taxonomies]
tags = ["Adventuring", "Kayak Adventures"]
+++
On our [training trip](@/posts/2018-05-19-training-trip.md), we all learned a
ton. Much of that learning came from our peers. Sometimes that meant someone
"flipping their boat" (jumping out of it) because they were left unattended on
a launch. Sometimes it meant our friends feeling cold because we'd forgotten
hot water. But one learning experience stands out as entirely provided by
mother nature. We had an unplanned lightning drill on our third day. It was a
nerve-wracking experience, but it also showed us how well our training prepared
us, and brought us closer together through a shared experience.

<!-- more -->

#### First signs

We were out near Aialik Glacier in the morning, and we'd all rafted up for a
discussion after traversing the ice. Afterwards, we set out to pick our own
lines through the ice-covered waters. I'd gotten feedback that picking lines
was something I needed to work on, so I set off on my own, and a few other
people fell in behind me. As I understand it, it was at this time that Erin,
one of the guides of the day, noticed that several people's hair was standing
on end.

As you may know, this is a late and very serious sign of a thunderstorm
approaching you, and represents a nontrivial danger of getting struck. This has
been discussed in a number of places. In particular, the picture shown
[here](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2381677/How-know-youre-struck-lightning-Picture-brothers-hair-end-minutes-before.html)
has provoked a lot of discussion. The bottom line? If your hair stands up: get
inside fast. Failing that, get to a less-bad place outside. That means moving
to lower ground, crouching on an insulated surface and making yourself as small
as possible. One place you do not want to be is on the water in a boat.

So when people noticed hair standing on end, suddenly we weren't taking the
leisurely paddle we'd originally planned. This became an on-water lightning
drill, one in which we were acutely aware of the very real danger.

#### Rather non-dramatic escape

In short order, Trent suggested that we fall into a single line to speed up our
path through the ice. Once we escaped some of the thicker ice, we rafted up and
briefly discussed our plan of action. That plan entailed getting off of the
water (back to camp) as quickly as possible. To facilitate that, Trent put
Emily and Sid, two confident and experienced paddlers in single kayaks, in
charge of bulldozing a clear path through the ice. The rest of us fell into
line behind them and paddled efficiently toward the shore. A trip that normally
takes an hour took us around 30 minutes. We wasted no time.

Along the way, tension was palpable. None of us really knew what was going on,
but we knew we needed to get off the water. But there was also a fascinating
feeling of calm and peace. We knew what we needed to do, and we were working
towards that as fast as we could. There was nothing more to worry about. I was
pleasantly surprised by that feeling, and some of my colleagues felt it too.

#### Lightning drill on shore

Back at camp, we were all relieved to be back ashore. All signs of lightning
had gone away. Hair was well-behaved again. Fiberglass paddles weren't buzzing
as they passed through the air. On the whole, life seemed like it had returned
to normal. We set about making lunch. Then Erin noticed another guide's hair
starting to stand on end again. Looking around, everyone with long hair had the
same thing going on. In the space of a minute, our tarps were down, crazy creek
chairs had been found, and everyone was crouched down and spaced out on the
beach. The textbook recommendation is fifty feet between people, which reduces
the risk of multiple people getting hit at the same time. We went with more
like twenty, just because of space constraints. After about ten minutes of
tense attentiveness, our hair "weather antennae" said the danger had passed. We
warily went on with our day, and it didn't happen again. We still don't know
what caused this, whether we were actually in danger, or whether we need to
worry about it happening again.

#### Some takeaways

This was a tremendously powerful experience for all of us. Seeing how the whole
group came together to stay safe was really inspiring. I took away a few key
points for managing potential emergencies in the future:

- Communication is crucial. Even in a time crunch, Trent took the time to get
everyone together and calmly communicate the urgency of the situation. This got
everyone on the same page and made sure we were all working towards the same
goals.
- Leaders don't have to take the lead. We all looked to our fearless leader,
Trent, and he was the person to coordinate our response to the situation. But
he was in a relatively fragile fiberglass boat, so he picked two very confident
paddlers and ice navigators to lead the rest of us back home. He didn't have to
be in front to demonstrate his leadership, and I think that can take a lot of
strength.
- Keeping your "head on a swivel" as a guide is really important. I'd never
have thought to look for possibly signs of lightning, but Erin, as an
experienced guide, knew to stay alert to anything unusual. And she stayed alert
after the first wave of danger had passed.
- Scary shared experiences can bring a group closer together. We can still joke
around and have fun with each other, but below the surface we also know without
a doubt that we have each other's backs. That's really powerful.
